Building GraphRAG Python MCP tools (#368)
neo4j-graphacademy/courses: asciidoc/courses/genai-mcp-build-custom-tools-python/modules/1-getting-started/lessons/3c-create-first-server/lesson.adoc

> = Create Your First MCP Server 

Reviewer: I think the language in this lesson could be simplified. There is a lot of "Now", "Lets", "First" use which could be condensed.

The use of "this" throughout the lesson could be confusing. It may not always be obvious what this is referring too.

Now it's time to put that knowledge into practice by creating your own MCP server from scratch.

Your challenge is to create a simple MCP server that demonstrates the core concepts you've learned, then run and test it using the tools you've set up.

[NOTE]
.GitHub Codespace
====
If you haven't completed the setup lesson yet, go back to link:../2-setup/[Setting Up Your Development Environment^] to configure your Codespace and environment variables.

You can keep the Codespace open while completing the course. 
You can open your existing codespaces at link:https://github.com/codespaces[github.com/codespaces^].
====

== Challenge Goals

To complete this challenge, you will need to:

1. Create a new MCP server using the MCP Python SDK.
2. Create a tool that counts the number of times a letter appears in a word.
3. Configure VS Code to use the MCP server with stdio.
4. Test the server using the Chat window in Agent mode.

== Step-by-Step Instructions

=== Step 1: Set up your project directory

First, create a new directory for your MCP server:

[source,bash]
----
mkdir strawberry

> cd strawberry

Reviewer: Adding the `strawberry` directory + `main.py` file to the repo would remove some friction and potential errors for learners.

----

=== Step 2: Initialize the project with uv

Initialize a new Python project using `uv`:

[source,bash]
----
uv init
----

This will create a basic project structure with a `pyproject.toml` file and a `main.py` file that you will use to build your MCP server.

=== Step 3: Add the MCP dependency

Add the MCP Python SDK to your project:

[source,bash]
----
uv add "mcp[cli]"
----

=== Step 4: Create your MCP server

> Open `main.py` in your editor and add the following code to create a simple MCP server:

Reviewer: `main.py` isnt in the repo. I was a little confused about where to put main.py and had to refer to the solution.

```suggestion
Create a new file, `strawberry\main.py`, and add the following code to create a simple MCP server:
```

[source,python]
.main.py
----
from mcp.server.fastmcp import FastMCP

# Create an MCP server
mcp = FastMCP("Strawbrerry")

@mcp.tool()
def count_letters(text: str, search: str) -> int:
    """Count occurrences of a letter in the text"""
    return text.lower().count(search.lower()) 

# Run the server when executed directly
if __name__ == "__main__":

>     mcp.run(transport="streaming-http")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    mcp.run(transport="streamable-http")
```

INFO:     Uvicorn running on http://127.0.0.1:8000 (Press CTRL+C to quit)
----

Once the server is running, modify the `.vscode/mcp.json` file to configure VS Code to use the server.

[source,json]
----
{
    "servers": {
        "strawberry": {
            "type": "http",
            "url": "http://localhost:8000/mcp"
        }
    }
}
----

This configuration tells VS Code to connect to the server at `http://localhost:8000/mcp` using a HTTP connection.

=== Step 6: Verify your implementation

To test your server, open up the Chat window in **Agent** mode:

1. Open the Command Palette (`Cmd+Shift+P` or `Ctrl+Shift+P`)
2. Execute the "Chat: Open Chat (Agent)" command

Now try asking the following question:

[copy]#How many times does the letter 'r' appear in the word 'strawberry'?#

The agent should discover the `count_letters` tool and prompt you to confirm the tool call.
It should respond with the answer `3`.

[TIP]
.The agent didn't call the tool?
====
This is the joy of LLMs and tool calling.
Depending on the underlying model, the agent may not behave as you expect.  
In this case, the model may feel confident in its own answer and not call the tool.

> Try switching to a different model, rephrasing the question, or explicitly mentioning the tool you want to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try switching to a different model, rephrasing the question, or explicitly mentioning the tool you want to use, for example:

[copy]#Use a tool to count how many times does the letter 'r' appear in the word 'strawberry'?#
```
